---
movie title: Onegin
comment title: One Again
rating: 

movie imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0119079/
comment imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0119079/reviews-30
movie tmdb link: http://www.themoviedb.org/movie/30237
movie tmdb trailer: 
movie tmdb poster: http://cf2.imgobject.com/t/p/original/6II5DNTho7QPTMw2hNo1gXAicNy.jpg

layout: comment
---

Here is a simple film done well.

It seems to be a gift from Ralph to his family to give them an opportunity to show their stuff. Wisely, they have chosen a small subject, a narrow scope. The problem is that Ralph is the weakest link. He does exceptionally well at one thing: the maddened illicit lover. I loved it in 'Oscar and Lucinda,' tolerated it through 'the English Patient,' and 'Sunshine' but find it annoying here. Now I see his standout performance in 'Schindler's List' differently, with less regard.

But there is a flip side: the surprise for me was Liv Tyler. She's been appealing before. I saw here several times in 1996-7 without notable distinction. Perhaps a low for her was 'Cookie's Fortune' where she got no direction, repeated in her other Altman role in 'Dr T.' Here, she shows a confidence I may have overlooked. The director understood how she uses her neck, and some key scenes have her acting with just the back of her neck.

Sometimes I forget that when women look gorgeous on film, it is due to an acting ability, especially if you start to deconstruct their faces. Liv's is horsey and crosseyed, but she projects it with a lovely poise. However in the penultimate scene here, her face falls apart as it should. Pretty good. Maybe she'll be someone to watch in the future.

The cinematography (Sliding Doors, Elizabeth) is quite good, especially at using indoor space. I appreciate that the directing was excellent and effective, but it was hardly original, and isn't that what first efforts are all about? But the sound direction and editing is uniquely superb, remarkable -- many tricks, and all used effectively. It's the best part.

This film competes with "The Wings of the Dove" in tone, strategy and plot. It is far superior in several ways technically, but Ralph's character and performance make me prefer Dove for the experience, this for the filmmaking lesson.

About the plot: the poem is deeply self-referential, being a novel in a poem about a poet who is undone because of a letter. That curse transfers, and crystalizes in another letter where it dies. What we write! What we write about writing! Some of this depth is conveyed in the elaborate staging of the writing of that letter -- and the strength with which Tatyana refuses its return. But I suspect the power of the original is lost. (I also suspect that this self-referential tendency of Russian writers is commonly thought to reflect the 'Russian character' which of course it does not.)