---
movie title: D.O.A.
comment title: New Life in the Genre on Presentation!
rating: 

movie imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0094933/
comment imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0094933/reviews-6
movie tmdb link: http://www.themoviedb.org/movie/9748
movie tmdb trailer: 
movie tmdb poster: http://cf2.imgobject.com/t/p/original/xYpIphVpzvNhHzv1K8qnNORzs7l.jpg

layout: comment
---

Books and movies really are different and nowhere is this more apparent than with the mystery. The genre is among the most popular in literature and least popular in film. The closest one usually comes is a 'thriller,' where plot details are revealed piecemeal just to keep your attention. Sometimes we are tweaked with a twist at the end (Sixth Sense, Usual Suspects), but it is localized and gimmicky.

Why this mismatch? Why are filmed mysteries (mostly on Public TV) mere character pieces? Because the nature of the mystery has to do with the notion of internal narrative in a novel; in 'normal' fiction, the separation between reader and writer is straightforward. In a detective story, in the original form, the reader is co-writer, with reader and writer each inventing what happens next. (Assuming the story plays 'fair' with facts and logic as was originally the rule.)

Each tries to trick the other, in a mental contest that adds life to the story in a peculiar and intense way no other genre or medium can match. The device is seldom quoted well in film, so in DOA (a remake), we have reason for celebration.

Caution: Spoilers ahead.

Here we have an old-style mystery which is deeply self-referential. The writer of this story wrote about: what else? A writer of mystery stories. The device of bringing life to the story by engaging the reader is applied to the story of: guess what? That writer having 'lost life' in his work and thence in his 'real' life. It is a terrifically well crafted self-reference in both the mystery form and the mystery story and concerns killing over yet a third story (which 'has life' because that student writer's life and death is the driving mystery of the film's story). Here, the director does not shy from making the viewer co-director. Thrilling!

This device is aided by two parallel effects: One planned, one not. The planned effect is overtly cinematic: The film starts with full color, normal lighting and 'straight' staging. The viewer is not reminded that this is a film. As the story progresses, the film becomes more and more aware of itself: the color is replaced with high contrast black and white, with the lighting and framing very 'arty.' The director wants to emphasize that as the viewer becomes a collaborator, the film gains inner life becoming more introspective.

The second effect is biographical. Quaid was deeply into drugs at this time. His real life savior and to be wife (no fooling) is the young student here. Adds another reflexive dimension.

You can enjoy this intelligent film both directly and indirectly. So cool.