---
movie title: Heist
comment title: The Stated and the Main
rating: 

movie imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0252503/
comment imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0252503/reviews-37
movie tmdb link: http://www.themoviedb.org/movie/11088
movie tmdb trailer: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sQXv1umg7NY
movie tmdb poster: http://cf2.imgobject.com/t/p/original/3m1TYun4pAxZEcnn3k2NaJ4z7YW.jpg

layout: comment
---

Spoilers herein

If he doesn't always entertain, Mamet always stimulates. His method is simple and consistent: explore the ambiguity between a reality and a presentation of that reality, and to do so through the fine, immediate granularity of dialog rather than character or plot.

His past films have been various takes on this same issue, only the outer form changing, from a multilevel 42nd Vanya to an extended cover for a lie (Winslow) to a film about making a film (State). Here the device is an old one: the scam. In the convention, the smart guy (and we know immediately who he is) has everything figured out. Such stories are a sort of reverse mystery -- the hero has already understood events and the viewer experiences the extended revelation.

In this convention, the genius of the hero in anticipating events is sacrosanct. And because we are seeing the mystery in expositional form, the camera must remain stationary and remote as if it were a theater patron. And that's where Mamet turns everything on its head. Anyone who thinks this movie is anything at all like 'the Score' or 'Entrapment' should have their license to watch films revoked.

The first reverse is mechanical. Until now, Mamet's work has been strikingly conventional so far as the stance of the camera. All his prior stuff has placed the viewer squarely in his or her theater seat. But here, where the form demands just that approach, he decides to make his camera dance. He grabs P T Anderson's camera guy and makes the camera a character. It's not fully masterful, but it is very clever: sometimes we are 'gathered' with one group of conspirators, sometimes with another. Mamet's intent throughout is to not only shift the truth, but shift the perspective of the truth as well.

The second way he messes with the form is that the plan falls apart at every turn. The hero hasn't scoped out everything, he's just agile enough to have lots of backups. But this guy hardly wins, which is what the form usually demands. He gets shot. His friend gets killed. He loses his lovely young sexy wife, even his boat. This is unlike the 'Spanish Prisoner' which was a sterile scam that unfurled according to plan.. This one is fraught with chance, error and human unpredictability. The entertaining part is that even after a couple viewings, you can't tell which is which: which is plan, which error -- which intended red herrings, and which just abandoned intent.

Mamet usually works with actors who play multiple dimensions at once. But here he picks a different lot: actors who are obvious. That is, we are always conscious that they are playing a part. He exploits this weakness to blend with the same weakness of the characters who themselves are obvious actors, (I doubt Hackman knows he's being goofed on.) 

Two exceptions: First, Devito is one of the most intelligent men in Hollywood if not the best actor. He plays the shill, which is yet another reversal.

The other exception is Ms Rebecca. In past outings Mamet has carefully written her part as an act of love, even sex. Here, he assumes too much. Many plot turns depend on her sexual opportunism, on her balanced scheming. Much revolves around her pulling this off, and he is so smitten that he assumes we have the same vision of her that he does, (See how Orson Welles similarly missed with his wife Rita in 'Shanghai.')

Though pretty, she just isn't up to this central role. For some reason, I think Jennifer Jason Leigh would have been able to have the requisite conniving moistness.