---
movie title: Psycho
comment title: Jazz Performers
rating: 

movie imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0155975/
comment imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0155975/reviews-346
movie tmdb link: http://www.themoviedb.org/movie/12687
movie tmdb trailer: 
movie tmdb poster: 

layout: comment
---

Spoilers herein.

Opinions on this are a matter of religion: I believe this to be literally true because images reach so deeply in the psyche and persist so.

My own belief is that the original formed a template not because it was good, but because it was original. Consider that there are only a half dozens stories anyway, and almost all of every film is not a copy of life, but a copy of some previous film. The best copies rely on the fact that you are replaying the original in your mind, so they get that for 'free' and can overlay their own message. Hitchcock's set a new template. This film is lucky enough to reference that template.

It is rather like IMBD comments. What's so great about writing these is that we -- both writer and reader, though strangers -- have shared a rather intimate experience: the writer can immediately assume a couple hours of a shared life. We annotate that shared experience.

In the case of this remake, we have a homeopathic commentary -- the closer, the more powerful the differences. Here we have actors that are in most cases MUCH better than the originals. Heche isn't a deep actor, but she is masterfully cast. However, Macy and Moore are famously multidimensional. They act more than one film, more than one character at a time. Moore is rather a whirlwind as she brings this annotative style of acting to several films a year.

So we have annotative acting where we can see two movie performances at once and groove off the resonances because of the near twinning. A large example: here the sex object is played by a lesbian, her sister IS a lesbian, and Norman is not gay: all a rather large shuffle of the underlying sexual dynamic. A small example: when first Macy encounters Norman outside the office, see how he needles Norman both as his character the detective and also as surrogate viewer. Another: when Heche is driving, we get a far deeper performance from her face -- she projects her mind on her face for the benefit of the viewer, she becomes both the character and the character's annotator. Way richer than the original. Anything Moore does exists in two spaces.

This film was set up for later annotation, in fact is structured in that very way. The first half, we have the real story: the theft and murder. The second half we have a second film, which overlays the first. Following that we have a more narrative annotion: the 'explanation.' (Which incidentally is tedious in the original, much more efficient in this version.)

We also have a completely different film cinematically. Hitchcock's camerawork was clever in its time. But today we have so much more we can do with the camera that a close watching of how he choreographs his eye, it seems slow, dull, passive. I'm not an admirer of van Sant's work generally, but this new film is very intelligent in its use of the eye and the motion of color. In this case, the film is quite far from Hitchcock's, and to my mind the changes are emphasized by their differences. The result is a hyperselfaware eye.

Close, annotative jazz acting on a familiar script, and colordancing distance in the eye make this a pretty rich experience. If you are serious about film, you really must see this. If you worship Hitchcock for some reason, then you are likely to be an unhappy viewer whatever you see.