---
movie title: O
comment title: Dry Welles
rating: 

movie imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0184791/
comment imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0184791/reviews-12
movie tmdb link: http://www.themoviedb.org/movie/11065
movie tmdb trailer: 
movie tmdb poster: http://cf2.imgobject.com/t/p/original/nIWjuDowSpSUn01K2KPLoOCU53H.jpg

layout: comment
---

Spoilers herein.

This was eagerly awaited by this Shakespeare-in-film buff:

--Julia was a remarkable Ophelia in a very impressive recent Hamlet. That Hamlet translated very cleverly and appropriately to modern teen culture. Hamlet and his friends as film students! The Ghost behind the play within the play as senior playwright Sam Shepard (while his wife was triumphing in Titus)! Her box of remembrances is an image I will possibly take to my grave.

--She was also in a tolerable, but uninspired teen 'Shrew.' That makes three teen Shakespeare films in three years. This is no accident, and possibly the sign of that rare species: an intelligent young actress. (Really, name one.) And that she was picked by Mamet for a role says a lot.

--In her 'Save the Last Dance' where she played opposite a black, she completely out hiphopped him. More black than black; I wondered what we would see here, where it could matter.

--T B Nelson was in 'O Brother,' and with Turturro played just the type of self-reference that Shakespeare uses in Othello, and Turturro did in his own 'Illuminati.' These two were so sympatico and intelligent, I just knew he'd do something amazing given this and his past directorial ambitions.

--Everyone in the film world knows Welles' Othello, one of the greatest films of all time. With that frame, surely something interesting would result.

But we have a miss here. The conception is all wrong. The core idea in the play is an honest man destabilized by treachery. Its important to know how easily destabilized one can be with words, while at the same time Shakespeare pummels us with his own words intent on scaring the bejeesus out of us by tweaking our own souls.

Alas, no words here worth listening to. No risk to our own beings. Without risk, there's no Shakespeare, no greatness.

Othello was in an honored position because he met the Venetians on their own terms and excelled. Odin excels at the black man's game, a completely trivial part of life. He was sought out by the authorities to win games. We are led to believe he is a poor student and not intrinsically charismatic.

So when he is destabilized, we have no reason to think it's not just a case of lowclass dumb jock who's been dissed. The Moor in Elizabethan context was well before the modern notion of 'rascism.' The bigotry would have been anti-Catholic. some anti-Jew, and in this study making more fun of the effete Italians than anyone African. He would have been exotic, puzzling. Casting the Moor as Shakespeare's most human character is the equivalent of modern science fiction, shifting the center enough away from the familiar to exaggerate the point. Placing the Moor in the racist US deliberately runs the risk of reducing him to a stereotype, washing all the humanity away. The incessant rap track and the basketball context drive that home. Othello is noble but Odin is a nonentity.

Maybe it would have worked if that racist Strom Thurmond was more explicitly cited. Ms. Rain Joan of Arc Phoenix (Bonanza Jellybean) is the best part. Hated to see her shot.