---
movie title: Dune
comment title: They Left Out the Beatles!
rating: 

movie imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0142032/
comment imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0142032/reviews-104
movie tmdb link: http://www.themoviedb.org/movie/876
movie tmdb trailer: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xYWJn2GolrI
movie tmdb poster: http://cf2.imgobject.com/t/p/original/wfN5DpiYFVmM4sVcHRspbHbJ49Z.jpg

layout: comment
---

Spoilers herein.

The Dune saga had some normal scifi elements: interstellar intrigue and (usually) a boy's  spiritual maturation. What distinguished it -- really made it stand out in its day -- were the deep notions of two then new concepts: psychedelic mysticism and ecological management. How Herbert wove them into his world was charming. They are the root of everything.

The ecological message was then novel; now it is mainstream -- even coopted -- so that element can have little power in this time.

But you had to be a young adult when this first appeared to appreciate the notion of spice as a necessary lubricant for insight. Space travel depended on the artificially created mystic visionaries (as Leary called them), the shaman "navigators," who with the help of spice could intuit the very folds of the universe and induce transformations.

The necessity of spice for intellectual/emotional survival is mirrored by the necessity of water for bodily survival. (And the people with the spice are without water.) This story has its full power only for the reader who understood the assumption of the time. Spice as LSD/mescaline was everywhere on our planet at that time.

But it would a tough sell today. That whole dream of enlightened peace is long gone, by two generations already. and would be inconceivable for mass TeeVee audiences. So what is left is soap opera.

It wouldn't matter even if these producers had done the effects well, or had set/costume imagination.

Please read the book. But you must do a double world shift: shift first to Herbert's home world, only then can you navigate to Dune.

----
layout: comment
---

In retrospect, one can recognize how 70s scifi was the ring for berserker tussles to define an American film cosmology of science and the mind.

In one corner, you had the gadget guys, the technology strain, epitomized by 'Star Trek.'

In another corner, you had the 'hard science' crowd represented by Asimov and others, later Sagan.

You had the revival of behaviorism in Ron Hubbard's carefully constructed tomes.

And in the final corner, you had the (sometimes geometric) mysticism of the subconscious (the planet Dune) where rogue impulses (worms) sometimes produced drugs and mantras. This was more deeply psychological, and was helped by the 70s wave of psychedelic drugs, an enchantment with (what we thought of as) Zen, and by a general counterculture movement.

Now, popular culture has split among the mass culture versions of these four. The gadget guys have been coopted by the PeeCee and special effects crowd. The science folks are all but gone now, replaced by the pseudoscience, paranormal and UFO crowd that Sagan invited in. This crowd dominates all the junk science and horror films of today, a huge mass.

The Hubbard old-style behaviorism has divided between Scientology (which is engaged in a rich campaign to control Hollywood) and the new-style behaviorism of Pat Robertson and his film 'university,' engaged in a similar assault.

So what has happened to the Herbert corner? All but gone. Several generations of successively more harmful drugs have killed the mystique of soma-spice; Islamic terrorists have destroyed much of Herbert's noble imagery; and the notion of a rich underlife has been found uninteresting to filmgoers. This film just proves the point.