---
movie title: Traffic
comment title: Not Out of Sight
rating: 

movie imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0181865/
comment imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0181865/reviews-23
movie tmdb link: http://www.themoviedb.org/movie/1900
movie tmdb trailer: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gjpadtJs9QA
movie tmdb poster: http://cf2.imgobject.com/t/p/original/aCLH8NKFqVQQB0IKTYD3kyu4bw4.jpg

layout: comment
---

Spoilers herein.

Despite my respect for him, I did not see 'Erin,' because it seemed to simple narratively and I cannot imagine how Roberts could be used in any kind of Soderbergh experiment. It seems he is back on track in pushing the envelope. When he does, he deserves respect as he has both cinematic ambitions and skills. But I think he got the balance wrong in some elements of this adventuresome experiment. That shows he's once again pushing himself to the limit (and partly beyond). We should applaud.

He understands that the camera is the primary instrument in cinema, all else is secondary, including acting and story. His goal is to master that camera, which other intelligent directors try also of course. Those others sometimes invite the camera into the action by having characters address it, or by involving the movement of the camera within the action. In both cases, the notion is to place the viewer's eye within the reality of the film.

Soderbergh eschews this, and curiously focuses on the technical elements of the film's emulsions within the context of time. Above all, the film is presented not as present action that the viewer is witnessing, but PAST action that the viewer has recorded. The art of memory not experience.

His last experiment (not his last film) was thrilling. The viewer there was present, but 'out of sight.' The game was in how the past was reconstructed, in a jarringly non-linear fashion. Okay, having mastered that, he moves now to the non-linearity of three stories. They are connected only by the mention of a common drug king. There is no indication at all that they are contemporaneous threads, except a couple passes in auto traffic.

He does a fine job of shuffling back and forth among the threads, keeping the mind simultaneously engaged. The trick here is to make it more explicit that the film you are seeing is film that you have made. The film is decidedly unprofessional, with lots of saturation problems, and motion jiggles. The framing is just as one would get with home movies. We ride in the back seat and get out with the actors. We run upstairs behind our buddies. The only exception (done to underscore the effect I am sure, but see below on the distinctness of the threads), is an overly arty shot of a helicopter coming in to land. Soderbergh himself handles the camera.

The traffic here is the narrative traffic the filmmaker is able to direct through your head. (Drug trade is a mere plot device.) These two tricks -- sliced parallel narratives and 'you were there' camerawork -- are supported by two stylistic tricks. The first is a bewildering number of characters. But he places each character in a set of local images that registers them immediately. Brilliant storytelling at least in this regard.

The second trick he doesn't pull off so well, and I'm unsure it is doable. He bombards us with thousands of images, over a hundred characters, each placed and identified locally using the same visual tricks, but he tries to distinguish the three threads dramatically and visually.

There are distinct photographic conventions for each of the three, involving different palettes, color saturations (as if three different bad labs were involved) and different tics in the interthread editing. That works fine. But the tone of each narrative thread differs too -- as if a different director and agenda and worldview were involved. So we have one narrative where the actors are wound tight and externally (the Mexican story) and the motives are romantic. We have another (the San Diego story) where the relationships are personal, and the acting is internal. Quaid is back from the dead! In the first, the romantic notions are based on nobility, absolutely lacking in the second where the relationships are closer and more convenient.

The problem is that you need a consistent image vocabulary to manage the narrative traffic, but too much diversity in the threads fights this, and it is in the third thread that the distinction fights the weave of the fabric. The Michael Douglas story is supposed to have great power and be about great powers -- including the power of family and the power of the drugs themselves. Douglas has been creepily effective in 'Wonder Boys,' but he doesn't seem to understand what this film is all about. He is tepid. Amy Irving is a poor actress, period. The kid does stoned well enough, but the thread can't hold its own against the others.

This is Soderbergh's fault. He just tries to do too much: to create diversity and consistency at the same time: music that stands still. But a marvelous experiment. Why couldn't Tom Hanks have such balls?