---
movie title: Impostor
comment title: Soiled Dickey
rating: 

movie imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0160399/
comment imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0160399/reviews-38
movie tmdb link: http://www.themoviedb.org/movie/4965
movie tmdb trailer: 
movie tmdb poster: http://cf2.imgobject.com/t/p/original/pf8JVMHJTkLo1NwaAwEmVDaheub.jpg

layout: comment
---

Spoilers herein.

Dick's stories are something good, but not quite cinematic like those of others. His type of writing has three elements:

--The creation and presentation of a new world. Dick's world is advanced but in inhuman ways so that the balancing goodness is driven inwards into the hero(s). Technology, government, mindless evil converge.

--The notion of constructed humanity, or human constructions within this context

These two notions are deliberately opposed which is why Kubrick and Scott were so attracted: it literally set the stage for visual ambiguities and tension.

The third, but only in the stories, was a twist -- a Rod Serling clever surprise.

This film is apt but bad.

The aptness comes from Dick's own personality: he didn't polish his stories. The rawness was a deliberate effect. He would have wanted a raw film as well, not a glossy, even oily rendition like Spielberg's 'A.I.' He would have wanted rough editing and cheesy acting like Scott and Harrison delivered in 'Bladerunner.' And he would also have wanted the crappy production values we see here. But about a third as long. The point is that in this respect at least, bad is good.

The misfits come from the failure to deliver the sort of oppressive world he had in mind. This looks more like 'Logan's Run.' 'Brazil' or '12 Monkeys' would be more right. And finally, the twist. After a few hundred Twilight Zone episodes you would think we would know how to pull off this zinger without broadcasting it. Here bad and bad are just bad.

There are two huge missed opportunities to reference other films, which is certainly something Dick would do:

1) Lots of films now are playing with the notion of what is real and whether the film can be trusted. The two 'Blair Witch' films are the most seen that deal with this, but many others do too, like the notable 'Shadow of the Vampire.' The padding here is largely in the 'hallucinations' he has. Would have added a lot if that spilled into the narrative we see, so that we couldn't trust our own eyes.

2) 'A Beautiful Mind' is the hot film right now. Missing from that film is the real interesting fact that Nash's delusions were largely shaped by Dick. Given Nash's superhuman power to convince (to invent reality), we well might have had a future where mathematics had in inherent mystical paranoia. Since this movie was a tossaway in the first place, they could have partnered it with 'Mind' as Nash's actual delusions. Now that would have been cool, and apt. Real science fiction in the Dick tradition, not Star Trek-quality stuff.