---
movie title: Iris
comment title: Not O'Keefe's Iris
rating: 

movie imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0280778/
comment imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0280778/reviews-48
movie tmdb link: http://www.themoviedb.org/movie/11889
movie tmdb trailer: 
movie tmdb poster: http://cf2.imgobject.com/t/p/original/4VLw7yvjKY92xMNeJ1Rdg1C9WaJ.jpg

layout: comment
---

Spoilers herein.

I was disappointed, greatly disappointed in this film. It has three very good actors and one truly great complex one (Winslet). It deals with an intelligent woman, rich potential for an intelligent film. Eyre has shown a gift for understanding how to stage the life and art of a mind, writing a book on the subject. The co-screenwriter did some multidimensional work in the past.

You can see how cleverly they tried to work out the difficulties: how to portray a woman with a great mind and the tragedy of her loosing it -- how to infer the richness of her internal life, so that we can grieve for something more than an old lady.

The construction was promising: overlapping symmetries of then vs now; internal life vs external action; extraordinary clarity of thought vs complete loss of reason; writing vs motion; sexual opportunism vs deep marriage. Of these, the main skeleton is then vs now; and one can clearly see that the hodgepodge of then/now juxtapositions is supposed be jarring, nonsensical reflection the woman's dementia. This is an intelligent idea, shaping the form of the narrative to mirror its substance, which in fact is just what Iris would have done. 'Requiem for a Dream' did that bluntly; here, we'd have a reason: a heroine which IS a master of narrative.

Promising. Even more with Kate aboard. The heavy lifting in this construction has to be carried by her. Dench and Broadbent get the flashy parts, but they are the easy roles. They get to play things straight, and if they fail to present a coherent being, well that's the point. Winslet has to lay the foundation. She has to create two characters, the internal one of the mind, and the external on. Each of those have to have two faces: the one of construction (in the 50's) and the one of reflection. She creates Dench's character; all Dench has to do is use that as the basis from which to subtract.

So far so good. But two main problems ruin this.

The first is that everything depends on a collaboration between Winslet and Dench. One needs to pitch, the other catch. But Dench will have none of this, sticking to her old ways. Absolute poison. I have no complaint about her work normally, because usually all she has to do is show up and do her thing without getting into a big philosophical folding. But not here. As a result, Kate looks silly setting up mannerisms and notions that aren't reflected later on. This especially noticeable because Bonneville and Broadbent do collaborate in this way, though the demands are limited to physical mannerisms, not the internal beacon of insight.

The other problem is that the then/now juxtaposition is watered down. I mean that in part literally: the tired old device of sensual swimming as an unfettered, exuberant life is used in an especially heavy way, complete with the falling rock bit. But there is a more fundamental watering down as well, and one can imagine Eyre seeing his vision melt under the guidance of the many, many sponsors involved. Gone is most of the adventure of sex as an intellectual construct. Gone is most of the free association confusion of the edits. Gone is the creation of the odd marriage compact involving Maurice. 

What is left means nothing. There is a potentially powerful scene where Maurice brings Iris back to a Bayley who doesn't recognize him. He finds her while food shopping; previously, he didn't have enough 'food' to entice Iris to let him into her world. One can see that the early meal has been restructured, even reshot: note how Maurice's mustache changes from moment to moment.

Oh well. At least we have Kate. Actors like this are always interesting. Emma Thompson, herself capable of multidimensional acting when sober, recognized what Kate has and gave her the big break in 'Sense and Sensibility.' Here, Kate returns the favor by introducing Emma into the picture. Kate presents not Iris, but Kate presenting Emma presenting Iris. The reading of the lines and the haircut are from a similar role Emma played in 'Carrington,' a more successful film.