---
movie title: Swimming
comment title: Choices
rating: 2

movie imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0202711/
comment imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0202711/reviews-39
movie tmdb link: 
movie tmdb trailer: 
movie tmdb poster: 

layout: comment
---

Spoilers herein.

This is a film put together as a class project in film school. It is a highly tuned product,  engineered to do well with the Sundance machine. That machine exists to produce  Norman Rockwellesque product for TeeVee (and now Blockbuster).

Here's the problem they would have discussed: TeeVee and real movies are wholly  different beasts. They are (except for comedy skits), completely incompatible. You'll have  to have both, these kids will have been told.

Okay. So what do we get? Forget that "coming of age" stuff; no one in the business  believes it and they only use the term as marketing BS to keep us happy. This is a story  about our future screenwriter -- the fact is made clear by the opening and closing  narration. She will have two competing, incompatible friends.

One stands for movies: she is deep, quirky, intensely emotional, often hard to fathom  and clearly more powerful. An encounter with her will often give you a permanent token  to wear. She's been around much longer. In this story, she will fall in love with a marine  who speaks to an imaginary friend. Movies.

Then we have the other friend. She's a relative newcomer, capricious, shallow, and has  more watchers. She uses sex as a primary tool and is opportunistically promiscuous.  TeeVee.

Our budding screenwriter needs to choose. After much indecision, she chooses: taadaa,  movies! but not before having an affair with a tie-dye hippie, obviously a Sundancer. She  appropriates his vehicle to rescue the chosen girlfriend.

Crank, crank crank goes the screenwriting machine: in goes the requirements, and with a  little clothing and dialog, out comes the movie.

Frankie as it happens chose movies because Sundance fancies itself in the business of  "real" filmmaking. But the actress, Lauren Ambrose went the other way to star in a soap  opera. Too bad, because she could have made it in real film. Some of you will write me  -- you always do -- and say: "yeah but it is really, really good TeeVee."

That's like saying you've found a pretty mosquito.