---
movie title: Dreams
comment title: Italian Dreams
rating: 3

movie imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0100998/
comment imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0100998/reviews-42
movie tmdb link: http://www.themoviedb.org/movie/64637
movie tmdb trailer: 
movie tmdb poster: http://cf2.imgobject.com/t/p/original/5lz4nVyhryoeO8Z4egYGXejaJVG.jpg

layout: comment
---

Spoilers herein.

I arranged to see this as I was visiting Italy. It deepens my experience from the great  filmmakers to orchestrate the context so.

Italians make a fuss over the simple pleasures. They eat like they speak, with their entire  upper bodies as they caress the most direct abstractions. Their language is designed to  be beautiful in itself in that easy alliterative tossing of vowels.

But those simple abstractions crowd out the more sophisticated ones as one can see in   (by Mediterranean standards) absurdly blunt religion, politics, even crime and sex.

Each person must make a choice whether the simple pleasures are worth the cost of the  deeper ones. It is a matter of design versus art.

Kurosawa chose the more difficult path his entire life except for a brief interlude with the  Soviets and here.

Usually his films begin life as meditations on ineluctable insights, then get captured in  detailed paintings. The resulting film images provide insight into the ideas, which is the  thing that makes his films worth living with. 'Ran' is complex and is a different film on  each viewing, each one potentially lifealtering. 

Not so here. Sometimes film can be personal, but that is impossible when you must have  many collaborators. In order to come to some common purpose; things need to START  with the visual as sort of a lowest common denominator. That's why special effects film  are rarely worth the viewing.

Here, Kurosawa has scores of collaborators, so he needs to shape his film in the Italian  way. That's why the fulcrum of the thing features our leading Italian-style filmmaker as  an ersatz Van Gogh. (He incidentally misunderstands Van Gogh, by the way. Vincent was  perhaps our most cerebral and literate painter. His absinthe addiction and porphyria gave us the first intelligent hallucinogenic art. But his intent was very conscious and  deliberate, not the obsessive Italian locomotive of intuition depicted here.) But never  mind, we get what he means.

In this simple, lowest common denominator, Kurosawa falls back on solidly established  tradition of Japanese ghost stories, particularly the films of (???) as a short cut. Only the  first one and a half story and the last deliver what makes him special beyond the genre.

Those segments are excuses for highly abstract pageants, self-referentially staged -  with the watcher (nominally the filmmaker) built in. The last one is the one that sticks  with you. It is amazing how often over the years I have consciously recalled that funeral  procession.

That last story is perfectly ironic. A 103-year old man preaches a simple life while  surrounded by waterwheels that superficially appear nature-friendly. But instead of being  the primitive devices he is working on, they are made of machined lumber with excessive  use of bolts. It is as if we were all in a great modern machine that we have abstracted  into something that comfortably feels like nature. I'm sure that is the way it was with this  elaborate studio set.

The mechanisms of those wheels is some combination of his generative imagination,  Mother Nature and the gears of society.

I can hear him saying 'I'm not dead yet,' like his alter ego in 'Madadayo,' but with a  certain  resignation of a valued life lived without the simple pleasures. Bless him for his life -  who among us will credit such a funeral celebration?