---
movie title: Frida
comment title: Taymorized
rating: 3

movie imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0120679/
comment imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0120679/reviews-183
movie tmdb link: http://www.themoviedb.org/movie/1360
movie tmdb trailer: 
movie tmdb poster: http://cf2.imgobject.com/t/p/original/sMvFOQjJZkRUC1qSIkOije1rjFH.jpg

layout: comment
---

Spoilers herein.

I'm willing to follow Julie into whatever adventure she chooses after her delivery of  'Titus.' In doing so, I open more of myself than I usually do (say for Jane Campion or  Sally Potter) but at the same time I have to acknowledge the foibles of the artist.

Julie is all about presentation. The form of the thing is paramount. She is very good at it,  which is of course her appeal. Her success is due to focus, and to an equal extent  borrowing from others.

Frida is a whole different beast altogether. She is good at what she did because her  passion bent reality to suit.

Now we have an interesting experiment: Taymor transforms life into artistic presentation  and she has chosen the life of Frida who transformed an artistic vision into a life. Four  levels here, all with the intent of being integrated. (Taymor would say five because she  inserts herself and her partner/collaborator in the score, something that is powerful but  off kilter.)

Does it work? Yes, I think so, well enough to take seriously and point out shortcomings  and goings. I have been an annoying critic of films about artists that don't inhabit the  artistic space of the artist. So we have a film about Anais Nin, one about Pollock and  another about Jacqueline Du Pre, together with countless others that exist in a mundane  space of dispassionate observation.

This is better, but still, we SEE events that indicate vision and passion but experience  none of it, nor are given  any clue as to the nature of that passion or vision. Here (and in 'Draughtsman's  Contract') we do enter the space somewhat, and successfully. The problem is that  Taymor's world is not the gritty, sweaty, bloody world of life but the crisp world of the  stage  presentation of life. So we enter Frida's paintings rather than enter her.

In other words, this tortured woman worked all her life to create images and pull them  into reality and we come along after her death and for our amusement do the reverse.  Seems an odd sort of appreciation.

Some things ring true for me, especially the reality-to-painting shifts. Some are patent  failures, like the checking off of facts: Diego gets fired by Rockefeller, Trotsky gets shot  at. The framing is of her being carried to an exhibition in her bed - this fails  dramatically.

And why not mention stuff that really matters, like the relationships with O'Keefe and  Goddard, things that affected the art and passion? I think I know why - they aren't  prefabricated for the stage.