---
movie title: Chicago
comment title: Cameradancer
rating: 3

movie imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0299658/
comment imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0299658/reviews-55
movie tmdb link: http://www.themoviedb.org/movie/1574
movie tmdb trailer: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8IxcfbldgBY
movie tmdb poster: http://cf2.imgobject.com/t/p/original/18pCc2XZ5MO7wsywOYEbhoeuxNw.jpg

layout: comment
---

Spoilers herein.

About fifteen minutes into 'Moulin Rouge!' on its opening weekend I realized that the world was to be changed forever. We've already seen the effects in several non-musicals, but here comes a musical instance.

There are two important dynamics at work here. The first involves the question that goes back 80 years in film and 150 years in photography (220 in painting): just who/what is the camera? With older musicals, the answer was obvious: there's the stage, the camera is the audience. 'Red Shoes' (1948) changed that forever when it introduced the camera into the dance as a dancer. 'Singin' in the Rain' (1954) followed that convention and effectively killed the musical. That's because you really need special talent to pull off this camera choreography. All the singers and dancers in the world cannot make up for an unintelligent eye. 'Newsies' (1992) was about as good as oldfashioned musicals got, and it was just the burble of something long dead.

That camera eye. Without the dancing eye, musicals were relegated to an alternative fantasy world for the use of intellectual film reference, as in 'Everyone Says I Love You' (1996) and 'Love's Labour's Lost' (2000). Then 'Moulin Rouge!' (2001) hit the fan. It was again an example of the dancing camera. Modern tastes flavored the duration of each glimpse, but the real magic of the thing was the eye that moved within the dance as not only a part of that world, but an exuberant dancer within it.

The second dynamic is the modern trend for increased 'folding' of the narrative perspective. 'Red Shoes' was a performance about a performance. The shifting in and out of the two levels gave an excuse for the dancing eye to relax and be mere observer. 'Singin' had a similar folded nesting, but the inner performance was in the characters' imagination as it is in 'Chicago.'

'Rouge' upped the ante by (at least) a triple nesting: it is a play within an absithne vision within a novel, each inside the other. The camera rushes among these in shifting perspective, not only dancing with each world, but among them as well. Now we have 'Chicago' that also establishes three worlds: the world of Roxie's imagination, the world of performance and the 'real' world of Chicago in which everything is a circus.

Again, the camera dances with frenetic abandon among these worlds. The director needs to be a master choreographer and stager. That's what we have.

Two examples of what struck me:

In the 'Cellophane Man' number, Reilly picks up his hat in Flynn's office and puts it on his head in the number. The manner in which he holds the hat shifts. I haven't been so impressed by the skill of a level shift since Meryl Streep stumbled in 'French Lieutenant's Woman.' (The mirror bit with Roxie was equally skilled, but required less coordination among music, actor, cameraman and editor.)

The marionette/dummy number was a masterpiece of stagecraft where the three worlds were mixed cinematically: the whole thing is created in Roxie's head, so she is literally pulling the strings, but she imagines Flynn as the great puppetmaster of not only her but simultaneously of everyone else. But Flynn himself is only responding mindlessly to the forces of Chicago. (Remember that during this part of the story, he is writing in her diary -- we discover -- literally creating her imagination and around it goes.)

The Latifah number, in contrast, was as oldfashioned in the eye as it gets, regardless of what one thinks of her performance. Demographic engineering.