---
movie title: The Hours
comment title: The French Lieutenant's Significant Other
rating: 3

movie imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0274558/
comment imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0274558/reviews-69
movie tmdb link: http://www.themoviedb.org/movie/590
movie tmdb trailer: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yMErdpA804Y
movie tmdb poster: http://cf2.imgobject.com/t/p/original/vRTqBRCLGiZNITXfdhGZd3tZ7Qh.jpg

layout: comment
---

Spoilers herein.

I love what I call 'folding' in film, and this is certainly a folded film. Simple folding is when one element of the film creates another and the two lay side by side. Folded.

Meryl Streep was in one of the touchstones of this technique: 'The French Lieutenant's Woman,' which existed as both a story and a film about that story, with Meryl slipping seamlessly between character and actor. At all times, she carried a shadow of the other.

Nicole has come late to folded acting in 'Moulin Rouge!' but she understands the demands well. Julianne has always been folded in her approach since the peak of self-referential folding: 'Vanya on 42nd Street.' These are three of the four master actresses capable of doing such a thing.

Woolf was 'folded' in her writing, shifting between events and self-conscious comment on the events, including implicit perspectives on the creation of both. This is much like Joyce and Nabokov but more mechanically neurotic. Cunningham's treatment extends that notion and Hare respects the folding.

Here we have one world of the writer, one of the character, and one of the reader. This latter is the novelty, with an almost predictable overlap between the last two in a second, embedded writer. It is an almost perfect construction brought to life by three of the most self-aware actors in history - a folded film about a book (Cunningham's) about a book (Brown's) about a book (Woolf's) about folding. This is a work of art about nothing less than life as art, beings as gods and the angst of that knowledge. Phil Glass's score is aptly relentless, reflecting hopeless fate.

So what is wrong? What keeps this from being a life-altering experience? The director Daltry, that's what.

Daldry never passes up a chance to be overtly emotional, falsely dramatic. Where Woolf and Cunningham are subtly rich, Daltry is vulgarly plain. Where these woman cry out for multidimensional expression, Daldry shoves them into one-dimensionality. (I'll never, ever forgive him for 'Billy Elliot.') Examples: the death of the bird is so sweetly fantastic, what with the ultradarling angel, I thought I was in a Fellini excess. When the aged Laura Brown turns up at Clarissa's and starts to tear up, we actually HEAR her blink her weepy eyes. When Laura imagines her death we are treated to a vision of rising river water that is completely out of character of the type of nuanced metaphor needed. When someone in one fold cracks an egg, EVERYONE must crack an egg. When Ed Harris does his tortured artist bit, we have every stoke as plain obviousness. And this from a man who has done this precise thing with texture as Pollock! (Incidentally, he's paid his own dues with folding film in 'Truman Show.')

I cannot pass up an opportunity to comment on the hair. All three of these leads are often redheads, two of them naturally. Toni Collette is as well. In this film, red hair color has been engineered down to Julianne and Toni to match the technique of red-deprived colored film stock copied from 'Far From Heaven.' That is, except for the red Eileen Atkins (flowershop lady) who has herself made something of a career out of Virginia Woolf.