---
movie title: Fahrenheit 9/11
comment title: The Unmovie
rating: 3

movie imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0361596/
comment imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0361596/reviews-729
movie tmdb link: http://www.themoviedb.org/movie/1777
movie tmdb trailer: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rsFwzhbBRrM
movie tmdb poster: http://cf2.imgobject.com/t/p/original/A107VwqqM8bWbgXfa8mEzIWpUC5.jpg

layout: comment
---

Spoilers herein.

I love movies because they exist in some halfway fold between reality and pure abstractions. When we experience a movie as individuals we are working through ways of mapping the one world to another, giving a narrative sense to life. But of course we don't see movies as individuals but as societies, and that makes things ever so much more complicated.

I am convinced, for instance, that movies define love to a large extent. And other things as well, especially what it means to be an American in this grand experiment of immigrants. But this isn't straightforward, nor any conscious plot: there are many folds and dependencies.

Nonetheless, there is a strong tendency to adapt movie stories to political beliefs. This first washed upon America with Ronald Reagan - himself a film figure. He was able to stick to solid movie narratives to literally shape American's beliefs. His simple, movie-based 'sunshine in America' notion caught fire, even in the face of pesky facts.

Since then, 'conservatives' have adopted the movie locomotive and hitched it to the similar dynamics of religion to build a story. 'Liberals' (how do these names get invented?) have the unentertaining job of trying to pry minds away from the comfortable movie narrative and explain that life is not so simple.

They are always bound to lose, especially when business interests have a reason to feed the machine. So what to do? What to do?

Well, you make a movie about how dumb the Republican movie is. You weave a metamovie, or if you can an 'unmovie' that dissolves the fiction with facts. But even an unmovie is a movie, so it needs a simple narrative. Moore is faulted because his simple narrative is similarly simpler than life.

But here it is: Bush is a febrile dimwit manipulated by slick weasels. Saudis pull money from the west and then feed it back with obligations. Thinking of the world as a 'Bonanza' western is getting us in trouble and seriously hurting people.

I'll credit Moore with extreme movie intelligence in spinning a simple story (incidentally based on facts) to deliberately destroy a similar simple movie story spun by The Powers (which unhappily flies in the face of facts). 

In doing so, Moore cleverly omits much. For example, he shows administration babblers claiming weapons of mass destruction and terrorist ties. And he then says nothing at all about the truth of these, because we all now know they are false. Having us fill the gaps with what we know from outside the film is masterful, like just showing us Bush's vacant face. Is his brain fried by his admitted drug and alcohol binges? Moore never even hints... except for four bars from JJ Cale's 'Cocaine' when mentioning Bush's year-long absence from military duty. 

Showing the preparation for the press announcements is similar genius: it shows that these guys are all about spinning their own movie. And that one sequence where he literally sets the Bushites in 'Bonanza' with the 'smoke 'em out' mantra puts us the viewers as those who are smoking out the truth at a higher level.

This is masterful storytelling, and could be a milestone in changing, but not breaking, our ineluctable need to see the world as a movie.