---
movie title: The Chase
comment title: The Other Stories
rating: 2

movie imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0060232/
comment imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0060232/reviews-25
movie tmdb link: http://www.themoviedb.org/movie/92170
movie tmdb trailer: 
movie tmdb poster: 

layout: comment
---

I don't know why Ollie Stone bothered to make "JFK," knowing this picture existed. Its all here with only a few adjustments, for instance the murder of Jack and Lee Harvey are combined. But we have the dumb, sex and gun-happy Texans, racist of course; dumb as circular nails and quick to mobify. I suppose Texas deserves all these stereotypes, even down to the comical religious note -- at least it did in the aftermath of the assassination. 

And simple stereotypes were still the mainstay of the quickly dying studio system, that system that still insisted on shooting on the back lot. So we have very theatrical dialog: in fact, not a phrase that is uttered here will be found in real life: only on a stage. And that's too bad, since the cast contains most of the actors then working who knew how to appear real.

Lillian Hellman came to the university where I was studying to teach a semester of creative writing. It was shortly after this film appeared and the gonging of disaster was still ringing for this film. She claimed that the first layer of the story was always doomed because of the nature of the bosses. But there's a second layer here that they didn't notice, but you will.

In collusion with Brando -- even then the world's best at conveying a second story hidden within -- she used the flatness of the characters around his character to create a second, far more interesting film -- more interesting in part because we invent it.

Tune your imagination to this: the sheriff's wife has some special connection to the bossman who owns the town. Perhaps he had an affair with her mother to judge from what he says. He drove Calder's family off their farm so he could drill for oil (whence he got his initial riches). Once the two married (young Calder and the daughter of his girl), he "adopted" them, appointing Calder sheriff.

With no choice, Calder takes the job in fear that at some point, the boss will ask for some sort of illegal favor. Meanwhile, he watches the boss's son embark on the same path with love and greed. That's where the story begins and what drives Brando's Calder.

Unfortunately, this method of weaving a backstory requires that every other character be a known type. Too bad for Fonda, DuVall and Marshall.