---
movie title: F for Fake
comment title: L is for Influence
rating: 3

movie imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0072962/
comment imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0072962/reviews-11
movie tmdb link: http://www.themoviedb.org/movie/43003
movie tmdb trailer: 
movie tmdb poster: http://cf2.imgobject.com/t/p/original/tsIrAQ7YkrHvTdMJIMaIHcRosVG.jpg

layout: comment
---

Orson Welles completely changed the face of film with "Citizen Kane."  It was precisely right to spawn the revolution in narrative layering.  For those who don't know, the Kane experiment was initiated not by  Welles but Mankiewicz. But it was Welles who expanded and pulled off  the success of managing so many types of narrative layers. (The number  and type would be later exceeded by "Annie Hall," but no one would  consider it a triggering idea by then.)  I don't think Kane was his best film, but it certainly was his most  influential, and as such it haunted him all his life. Especially  haunting were all the types of layers he discovered after Kane. As he  only had that one shot at greatness, it would have been great if he  could go back and remake it, adding the new ideas.  This project is the next best thing. But to see its beauty, you have to  know two things: first that the layers that Kane is missing and that  many filmmakers used since is the notion of annotative narrative  layers. Second, you should know that several of his "lost" projects  exploit just this notion, especially "Other Side of the Wind."  Here's the setup in this fake documentary about fakery:   You have the layer of Kane, which is based on Hearst. (A story about a  storyman.)  Now Welles adds the (completely bogus) layer that Kane was to be  originally about Howard Hughes, a more intrinsically layered character.  (This remark, incidentally, is what triggered Scorcese's interest.)  Then to Welles' bogus movie about Hughes' life (itself a bogus notion)  he adds another layer: Irving's bogus story about Hughes' life. But he  doesn't stop there. Indeed, he goes further into another layer: an  Irving story (presumably _not_ bogus) about an artist (Elmyr) who  produced bogus artworks, including bogus Picassos.  The first two thirds of the project are concerned with getting all  these plates spinning at the same time. Some very clever editing is  used to merge the layers, even though nearly all the camera-work is  mundane.  The final third takes all these and weaves another layer that  intersperses. It begins with the image of a lovely woman to whom he  introduced us in the very beginning. It was a seemingly inexplicable  introduction: candid shots of men on the street ogling her vampish  walk.  This woman is Oja Kodar (aka Olga Palinkas), Welles' lover, companion  and screen writing collaborator on all his folded projects -- all lost  except this one. Around this woman, Welles conflates every layer you  have seen before into a story about her seducing Picasso into painting  22 pictures of her, presumably nude, of which he makes her a gift. She  subsequently sells Picassos which turn out to have been produced by her  grandfather, Elmyr who we saw earlier.   In the earlier shots, we actually see him produce bogus paintings which  are then burned. But in Welles' confabulation, the originals are burned  and the fakes sold.  (You should know that in the lore of folded narrative (which goes  through cabala to Finnigans Wake), there are exactly 22 folds you can  make and no more.)  Things are tied together with Orson admitting to being a fake, and the  story a fake, but perhaps necessary in the name of art?  No one should see "Citizen Kane" without also seeing this annotation.