---
movie title: Visitor Q
comment title: Uncomfortably Unperverted What About Bob?
rating: 3

movie imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0290329/
comment imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0290329/reviews-54
movie tmdb link: http://www.themoviedb.org/movie/4241
movie tmdb trailer: 
movie tmdb poster: http://cf2.imgobject.com/t/p/original/3qX1p8aBo07TqaJgD07ibH2AtRX.jpg

layout: comment
---

I watch a lot of films and I do it seriously. I have very few Asian filmmakers on my list to see after Kar-Wai and Kurosawa. That's because most Chinese and Japanese filmmakers are captured by the enterprise of style. Very little new can come from such explorations; no matter how elaborately you decorate an industrial building, it is at root a depressing form.

But I might be putting Takashi on the list. I previously saw "Audition" and was impressed. Now this.

The basic form is the screwed up family that is saved by the intervention of a visitor. In the normal form, the visitor isn't contriving to do good, but does so just as a result of his nature.

Takashi's version exaggerates the degree and manner in which this family is broken, but his stylistic exaggerations are uncomfortably acceptable. This family is less broken in deep ways than the typical stretch. Yes, there are unusual, even perverted things here, but they all seem like rather small enlargements of what we find in families. Anyway, whether it strikes you the same way, that's one component.

A second component is that all the theatrical exaggerations are imagined first in cinematic terms. So though this is a low budget fantasy, everything is communicated efficiently. We fall into the rhythm quickly and naturally because so much of our film memory is exploited.

The one oddball thing is that curious Japanese censorship of pubic hair. We get some very perverted scenes here: after a man has sex with his teenybopper daughter (explicitly shown), he rapes and kills a coworker. While dismembering her, he decides to have sex with the body and gets stuck as rigor mortis sets in. He is saved by a shot of heroin from his newly lactating wife, who incidentally is both a prostitute on the side and a target for beatings by her son. All this is shown to us and the censors decide to get picky about hair? 

But it is the third element that captures me. These types of movies challenge us. We are supposed to be both watcher and participant, indeed the actors are surrogates for us as much as for anyone real. This folding of us into the story is accomplished by making the main character a filmmaker/reporter and the main driver of the story his making of a film.

Takashi's relationship to the character making the film within is the same (by definition) as our relationship to the visitor who both observes and participates. Folding: it is the new magic of film narrative and in the two Takashi projects I've seen, it is masterfully and originally shaped.