---
movie title: The Tick
comment title: Engorged
rating: 1

movie imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0242949/
comment imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0242949/reviews-41
movie tmdb link: 
movie tmdb trailer: 
movie tmdb poster: 

layout: comment
---

Many comments compare this to "Mystery Men." Both, these folks say, portray superheros as regular folks and spoof the whole genre of superhero movies. 

I liked "Mystery Men," better than any Marvel-derived movie except "Hulk" and perhaps "Daredevil."

The Marvel formula was to introduce some humanity and coincident human drama around which to wrap their action panels. That placed the tone at a certain place on the comics spectrum. The tone was far less important than the placement on that spectrum.

To find the same place on the movie spectrum you have to move to the absurdly human, so far to the left that only comedy -- a certain fateful dark comedy -- can contain it. "Mystery Men" made that adjustment and worked. It was funny, sure. But it was true as well, and may have been the peculiarly powerful Garafalo's best role.

This is an entirely different beast altogether. It starts life as a goofy comic and is carried over as a very, very short sitcom. It doesn't try for humanity, it tries to fit the mold of sitcom characters. If you think sitcoms are life, you might believe The humor of "Mystery Men," is somehow similar to this.

Quite apart from that, I'm interested in how the engineers of these are attuned to political narrative. 

The US president, whoever he is, always attempts to define the national tone in cinematic narrative. The current occupant has been particularly effective in this regard. Essentially billions of dollars go into reinforcing this "story," so it is no surprise that lots of little guys assemble in its wake to try to be pulled along.

The main thread of the Republican narrative is "stupid is endearing if the heart is in the right place." Purity of heart always trumps intelligence, a remarkably effective strategy to blunt any reasoned argument.

So we have movies like "Red, White and Blond," which not only followed the narrative but placed it in a specifically political setting. And we also have this: a dumb extremely strong guy with a heart of gold. A girl dressed up as the statue of liberty. See what I mean?

Plus we have the two foils: the slimy immigrant and the gay twinky in the fairy/bunny costume.

The Fox network? No wonder.