---
movie title: Topaze
comment title: Advertised As One Thing, But Is Another
rating: 2

movie imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0024684/
comment imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0024684/reviews-4
movie tmdb link: 
movie tmdb trailer: 
movie tmdb poster: 

layout: comment
---

At this period in the history of film, there was a huge battle among modes to determine which would remain as the mode we accept at "normal" movies. One losing mode was the filmed play, complete with theatrical conventions of acting. This is one of the best of the waning days when such a thing could be presented as a legitimate movie.

The story is simple enough, just enough to establish a simple contrast of good and evil, here cast as capitalism. (This would incidentally and anachronistically be cited by government anticommunist witch-hunters in the 50s.) It allows a world for Doctor Topaze to inhabit, which is the only purpose of the project. Inspired actor and drunk Barrymore does very well in conveying both the manner of the character and the manner of theatrical acting involved; much of his screen time is involved with him performing in from of an audience.

The meat of the story is that a product is being advertised as one thing which it resembles but it is in fact another. In the story's case it is bottled water. In the case of the film, it is a play being advertised as a movie, which it resembles. In both cases Barrymore or his character are enlisted to lend legitimacy. In both cases, experts aligned with the industry celebrate the and endorse the deception. In both cases, Barrymore/Topaze is able to turn it to his benefit.

Myrna Loy is a "kept woman" and quite happy with that state, something that annoyed the censors. She's pretty, which is the point.

This was on my "to watch" list because of the self-referential story. But I was surprised to see another layer. What happens at the end is that Topaze is about to steal the rich industrialist's mistress. He does so by exiting the play and entering -- with her -- a movie aptly entitled "Man, Woman and Sin."