---
movie title: Sunshine
comment title: Orbital Mechanics
rating: 3

movie imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0448134/
comment imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0448134/reviews-170
movie tmdb link: http://www.themoviedb.org/movie/1272
movie tmdb trailer: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r0ciLKeMGeU
movie tmdb poster: http://cf2.imgobject.com/t/p/original/fAqme02eg4PfWFUDqFQgyJKgLzp.jpg

layout: comment
---

Some years ago, two of the great filmmakers made "space ship" movies. Kubrick's version was a masterpiece in narrative engineering, a story about who is control of the story: man, machine or god; alternatively viewer, writer, performer. It was framed in a cinematic scope unseen at the time, visually and musically. It changed the world and not just the world of how we envision outer space. Few since have been able to play with narrative battle as adroitly since, "2001" being something as rich in narrative folds as "Citizen Kane" before or "Annie Hall" after.

"Star Wars" and "Star Trek" are toys in comparison.

A device in 2001 was machine, grandly and Germanically engineered as contrasted with the vast active sphere whose mystical influence we slowly discover. Tarkovsky followed with "Solaris." Its not as grandly conceived, alas. He had the ability but not the allowance. But he uses this same globular moil with similar transcendental influence. But his narrative twist went one further, reflecting back on the story the character sees as well as what we do.

Soderbergh remade it recently, trying hard to work in sizzling vision, having an adequate budget. But he was unsuccessful, I think because all he did was copy what Tarkovsky wrought. We've evolved in what we expect, and in particular how much visual ambiguity we are willing to allow.

So now we have this. I think it deserves to be considered with these two. I was very, very impressed. The story itself is mundane, surely not as reflected back on itself as the other two. Its wholly contained within the characters we see. Its just their obsessions and not ours that are manhandled. But the visual vocabulary we are given! Wow, this man surely deserves our appreciation.

Where he's coming from is obvious. In previous projects, what he's done is develop a notion of a parallel, even fabled reality, and then jumped directly into it, giving us markers along the way of the ordinary reality we left. Druggies, kids. Now it is stellar beings. 

The images are more intense. The characters on screen become dangerously captivated by them. As the story develops, we encounter a being that has crossed over and who is shown always as a blur. Its magical what this one decision does. But its in the context of the tendrilled brightness that it all captures us similarly.

Oh, you have all sorts of ordinary bits: fights, missions, sacrificial struggles, men lost in space, exploding fireballs and all that. But they're there to satisfy the kids who pay the bills so real men and women can stretch their dreams.

Just consider one scene, the last one. We are set up for it early in the film where our hero makes a film for the folks back home. We see that movie-within after we know that some mystical event has occurred that "we" on Earth will never, could never, know. We see a desolate landscape with the Sydney Opera House in the near background. A stellar event occurs. The setting is mystical itself. Its as though our voyager Boyle has connected and delivered new life to us. Its very carefully perfect.

This has not been officially released in my country. When it is, I hope to see it on the biggest screen I can, and it may make the list of the two most important films of 2007.