---
movie title: Infamous
comment title: Artificial Cowboy Boots
rating: 2

movie imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0420609/
comment imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0420609/reviews-40
movie tmdb link: http://www.themoviedb.org/movie/9672
movie tmdb trailer: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jZw8ORyIbLI
movie tmdb poster: http://cf2.imgobject.com/t/p/original/lkKo9XfdlQBii1OVexGPonV31dL.jpg

layout: comment
---

Its not often that we get an opportunity like this, where movies compound. We get it in series, where for instance we can see how different cinematic philosophies reshaped "Alien." We get it in remakes, where a things are sometimes turned upside down, or the almost nearness ("Psycho") makes the reshaping more acute. We get it in movies that quote other movies for different effect.

But I do not know of anything like this. We have real life, a real event that actually happened. We have Capote's fictionalized reporting of it. By itself, that raises significant wonder about the nature and purpose of narrative. It wasn't a particularly good book, but it was important in raising this issue about truth. Not truth per se, but how truth is acknowledged. In order for us to see the world clearly, the artist has to distort it so that by the time it gets through all the channels it "seems" real. An actor's job is not to be real, but to convey reality, for instance, so there has to be a sort of purification of the world and amplification of certain things.

Then on top of all that -- already a mound of self-reference -- we had a movie based on the book. Created with expertise, it ignored the central issues raised by the book and substituted the movie equivalent, a recasting of a controversial narrative stance into a set of narrative conventions that are acceptable to film audiences. It was depicted as true, using the distortions common in film but not so common at the time in literature. 

(Since then of course, the matter of truth and fable have become commingled even in ordinary newspaper reportage, and co-opted by the political establishment. So these issues may seem tame today.)

Fine. But now we have two movies that cover new territory. It turns out that Capote himself was an act. His own devices are turned against his being. We do to him what he did to "the killers." by "dramatizing" the events that led to and included his "dramatization" or reality. Its what I call folding. And to have two different movies that do this, made at the same time, with strong talent is remarkable, unique, though perhaps the 9-11 movies qualify.

The game here is a matter of where the filmmaker has decided to place us in the controversy. Do we side with Capote, and accept that reality is necessarily co-opted by art -- NECESSARILY -- or treat Capote as an aberrant being whose personal ghosts can "explain" the decisions he made? These two films are based on two books themselves, by different writers who take contradictory stances on this. In one of the most fascinating turns imaginable, the films from these two books reverse those poles.

The other film, "Capote," decided to take the stance that yes, this is part of the requirement. It hired Hoffman, one of our expert actors who can handle this sort of multiple being. Sure, the one we thought we saw was the prancing poser, but Hoffman's Capote really was aggressively balancing between life and theater, between a self he carried and one he created, between what he said he was doing to everyone including himself and what he really was. It was another masterful performance from Hoffman. Unfortunately, it is in a dreadful movie.

This is a good movie. McGrath has this skill of making every element coherent down. What this means is that we get a narrative that makes sense but a Capote that doesn't. Sure, he is an amusing, queer little guy. But we aren't placed in a controversy that has to do with how story gets to us and why we demand certain occlusions.

I'm beginning to think we shouldn't trust McGrath into our lives. Competence can hurt.