---
movie title: Gunga Din
comment title: The Watchers, the Musicians
rating: 3

movie imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0031398/
comment imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0031398/reviews-69
movie tmdb link: http://www.themoviedb.org/movie/24965
movie tmdb trailer: 
movie tmdb poster: http://cf2.imgobject.com/t/p/original/y77eki1sFjbiVCNt8Csdj80CZED.jpg

layout: comment
---

I love noodling around in movies from the 30s. This is where great experiments were made, and the evolution of the medium furthered. If you want to understand nearly anything in film excepting noir, you'll find yourself passing through some milestone movie from this era.

If you dip into the action-adventure form from time to time for the sheer cinematic adventure, you'll see this movie in it. 

Stevens is a particularly interesting director. I like him. I like his humanity; I think you have to be especially sensitive to the human embodiment to be able to exaggerate human foibles in a way that seems true. This is a movie about war. But Stevens would actually go to war. I've seen his immensely important and powerful films of D-day and the discovery of the Nazi execution camps. I suffered with him after the war as he tried to reconcile himself with the drama of simple family dynamics. 

Here, I watch in amazement at his depiction of war made just before that experience. Its jaunty. It places our heroes in a delicate balance between participating in a battle (the final one) in a human way -- confronting the evil leader -- and watching it as we do. I believe this is the first instance of this sort of narrative fold in a war movie: participants watching.

The parents of this are Cowboy and (American) Indian movies, with great sweeps of horsemen and movement. The dependents, obviously enough are the Indiana (catch the name?) Jones movies which are all about exotic, conspiratorial societies and ritual torture and of course, escape. I suppose that's too obvious to mention.

The score is interesting. Its perhaps the heaviest I know, at least at the beginning. Every grand shot is annotated by a grander, overblown theme. Its so big, its comical by today's standards. But the odd thing is that it works better today than it probably did when new. That's because there is a sonic fold here as well. At the end, the score moves from being something in the watching layer -- not part of the world of the movie -- to singing and bagpipes within the world of the action.

Its a subtle shift. I recently saw it used to amazing effect in a small Australian film "Last Train to Fredo." It works. It works at a deep level. 

Now see how that is doubly folded: the key plot device on which our hero is built is his creating music within the story, music with agency that changes the entire outcome not only of the movie, but (we are told) the whole world.