---
movie title: Rent
comment title: Lost in Translation
rating: 1

movie imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0294870/
comment imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0294870/reviews-747
movie tmdb link: http://www.themoviedb.org/movie/1833
movie tmdb trailer: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=55
movie tmdb poster: http://cf2.imgobject.com/t/p/original/yfuqoorsy39WqWHDkgnMNxJRuCl.jpg

layout: comment
---

When I enter a musical, I tuck my imagination away until I know its safe, because the film musical is a messed up genre. You won't know where your footing is until will into the thing. Its not at all like most movies, where there is a shorthand that sets you where you need to be in the first minute or so.

Its because there is such a strange blend of realities. There's the reality depicted, the story drawn from it, the staging of the story. There's the presentation of what happens in it and comment on that. There's the reality of the characters and of the actors as performers. All this gets sliced and diced. Then if you have a movie of a stage show where this is all worked out, it recomplicates things. For instance in "Phantom of the Opera" there is a stage show about stage shows, and everything has been shuffled transparently. "Dreamgirls" does this in a similar way.

"Moulin Rouge" decided to have the center of the thing purely about this slicing and nesting.

So I went into this with some trepidation. First, I know this director. He's not a dolt. He's managed his Potter franchise unevenly, but you can see some sophistication in there. But he's not a good technician, and mastery of narrative structures seem to have eluded him. Also, I've seen the Broadway show, which has four ways of turning the show inside out: one character is a filmmaker; one a rock composer; two a stage performer; and one (Angel) an actor in the sense of playing a role.

Each one of these is given some writing device that can turn what you see into something created from one of these folds. Its been worked out by some very clever folks, presumably working intuitively, and I was afraid the movie would lose all this folding engagement. 

It does. Which leaves us only two things to potentially like: the songs and the story.

The songs have some power, yes. But its engineered power that is available to hundreds or thousands of artists smart enough to purchase it.

The story is what really screwed me around. Not the STD bit. When this was new, there really was a societal need to push back on AIDS ignorance. Holding some sympathy for the victims was a sort of proud responsibility one could hold for countering hysteria. But today, AIDS is an ordinary public health epidemic, without the loading it once had.

That leaves us with a gaggle of counterculture bums. 

We're supposed to buy the notion that the seedy slums of 19th century Paris was a sort of artistic marsh, a wetlands where rot and creation coexist, and out of which great art comes. And that parts of New York in the modern era are similar incubators. That bright young talented people put themselves in these situations so that somehow their power will be nurtured, or purified. But these are bums, the lost, the broken. The power that's implied DOES work in the show. It doesn't work here.

What we're left with in the movie is the impression that there is a very long food chain of creativity. There are thousands of creative professionals between this story and the images we receive, people who take their art and life seriously, who work and go home and come the next day. All this slickness and polish and fullness... that doesn't come from scrappy souls finding new doors, inventing, discovering.