---
movie title: Kongo
comment title: Jungle Sex
rating: 3

movie imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0023101/
comment imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0023101/reviews-17
movie tmdb link: 
movie tmdb trailer: 
movie tmdb poster: 

layout: comment
---

I have been unable to get the original of this, made by Todd Browning. Browning is one of the most interesting filmmakers I know and one of the reasons is that he is unafraid to dive directly into dark corners and send back purely cinematic reports. I believe this is very similar, a "talkie" remake that only refers to the prior history and sticks to Africa.

You may not know the story. Its pretty rich. A stage magician has his wife stolen by another man who takes her to deepest Africa to essentially rape the people and resources. In the process, the magician is crippled. He also goes to Africa and builds his own empire. Instead of force, he uses guile to fool the natives with his magic. Drugs and force of character enslave two women, a white henchman and later a visiting doctor.

One of these woman he believes to be the daughter of his exwife (the slut!) and the man who stole her. The two men are the two white powers in the region. The cripple does everything he can to "cripple" his competition and ultimately the two are gathered where he reveals his ultimate punishment, that he has defiled this man's daughter.

The whole setup is sexual, and particularly the reason that the story has to be transported to Africa. Then more than now, black men, sweat and throbbing drums wove a tapestry of primitive desire against which the rutting of whites could have context. In this case, the sex is punitive.

The story turns, and we learn that the girl is in fact the cripple's daughter. Thus defeated, the magician sacrifices his life to see that girl escapes, after she forgives him.

There's an odd scene in here, seemingly inserted late. The words don't match the mouth movements. The cripple as he is preparing to "save" his newly discovered daughter, she is unconscious and he embraces her. He says that this is the "first" and last time he will do so. Yet earlier it is plain that she has been sexually ravished, drugged and imprisoned. Its precode, but I suppose there's only so far you can go.

Its pretty amazing dramatically, allowing all sorts of histrionics. There are few calm moments; everyone is at the dramatic max all the time, and it gets tedious. The magic is underwhelming. The surrounding blacks incredibly gullible. I can at the moment only imagine how Todd would have handled this, but I can't wait. Until then, I will ravish this and keep it prisoner in my own jungle.