---
movie title: Topper
comment title: When is Ectoplasm Wasted?
rating: 2

movie imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0029682/
comment imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0029682/reviews-23
movie tmdb link: http://www.themoviedb.org/movie/23101
movie tmdb trailer: 
movie tmdb poster: http://cf2.imgobject.com/t/p/original/aaRxBsW3oJLn8xrjQYbDcboTXYR.jpg

layout: comment
---

I don't know how many movies have been made around the notion of leaving an "up tight" life and "going with the flow." Perhaps tens of thousands. That's even without counting the few regular character types that are there just so that as a story moves, it can throw mud in the face of some staid person. Usually the target is someone in authority or privileged who clearly doesn't deserve their station. But as often it is someone who should be tortured merely because they are too tightly wound.

I'm not sure why this is so prevalent in films. Obviously, there's a class appeal, and in the thirties that was in the US drawn pretty clearly during the depression. Though the income disparity now is far worse than then, the floor has been lifted by various government programs. Perhaps that's it. For me it remains mostly a mystery. But the fact is that there is a big story, a meme you can trace through many films.

Its at one of its early -- and therefore influential -- peaks here.

The story is that a rich, completely irresponsible couple die. They cannot be sent either to heaven or hell because although they haven't done anything bad, they haven't done anything good either. They simply haven't done anything in the entire lives that will matter. They have to do a "good deed" before they are released. (They figure this out by themselves.)

Of all the things they choose to do, of all the things that could justify a live of wealth, privilege and carefree pleasure... The one thing they find among all options is to help a staid banker become less staid. Milestones are: getting him to smoke, drink, dance, fight and sing. The key turning point is when his social climbing wife who is obsessed with orderliness is talked into wearing sheer panties "that only a fallen woman would wear."

Its an odd story indeed.

The thing that interested me was the way cinema was exploited. As far as the very beginning, film was used to make people appear and disappear. That's the key gimmick here, part of the joke being that when visible they are very attractive folks. There are several effects used, some rather well. The better ones include the actual fading in and out which has all sorts of image nuance. Less well done are objects that are manipulated by the invisible; these are obviously strings or stop motion. These are little better than in the "Invisible Man" of 4 years earlier.

Jokes that only could exist in film.

Of secondary interest is the girl, Constance Bennet. She's supposed to be incredibly desirable, the ideal sexy blond. She's married to Cary Grant's character and engages in a "Thin Man" inspired banter. The mechanism by which she performs the good deed is to have an affair with the banker. On success, she happily is reunited with Grant who smiles and says "This was our best fight ever!"

An odd framing for the odd story.