---
movie title: Numb3rs
comment title: Quantum Collapse
rating: 1

movie imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0433309/
comment imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0433309/reviews-85
movie tmdb link: 
movie tmdb trailer: 
movie tmdb poster: 

layout: comment
---

Film is a strange beast. You have to show things, and by showing them you advance the narrative. 

With books, you can couple the words with interior feelings, thoughts, ideas, emotions and insights. With film you can only show, or in the worst case explain. So film is relatively limited in showing love for example. Its hampered when showing creative action and work. It presents major challenges if there is internal mindwork going on, unless you are trying to make sense of what you see.

So there are essentially no good films about mathematics or any similar internal imaginative processes. That's why, I believe, we have created the fiction that sports somehow matter as much as they do: we can easily make stories about them. We can easily see what is going on.

Now enter Tony Scott. He is our most creative mainstream filmmaker in terms of imagining a certain type of drawn effects. His treatment of the subtitles in "Man on Fire" will be studied in schools for eons. Independently, he is relatively accomplished with spatial definition, when the space is large and cranes and helos are enlisted.

So he came up with this idea to illustrate internal thought processes and apply them to what passes for mystery thriller on TeeVee. Its not a bad idea. Unfortunately, there is the collapse of creative insight to mathematics. This is allowable and in fact would be supported by most mathematicians. But them most mathematicians are poor mathematicians. 

But the collapse continues: mathematics is collapsed into notation, and notation into numerically oriented equations. This in fact is a tiny, tiny part of the galaxy of math. Its as if somehow you defined life in terms of crinkled bedsheets.

Anyway, how well does he do? My judgement is based on only the first three episodes, and I have to report that you couldn't force me to watch the rest.

I know someone who advised on the math, and he's quite happy that at least the discussion of the math and the equations shown are genuine, even if the application to crime is almost always bogus. Well, I suppose that's something.