---
movie title: Starter for 10
comment title: What's There When You Fail
rating: 2

movie imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0477095/
comment imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0477095/reviews-35
movie tmdb link: http://www.themoviedb.org/movie/14055
movie tmdb trailer: 
movie tmdb poster: http://cf2.imgobject.com/t/p/original/1kqVhfLaYYWy3aHD5Ge39hMQPxA.jpg

layout: comment
---

Its thin and poorly put together. On that score, its not worth your effort.

On the other hand, its a particularly useful lesson in narrative structure, and quite a bit more fun than the story itself could be. 

The lesson is in two parts. One is that getting ninety percent there is nearly as bad as getting ten percent there. Good writing -- at least of this kind -- is about sweating the details. The writer didn't and the director let him get away with it. In fact, you can see that the writer had a particular story in mind, a particular sort of perfection. He couldn't reach it so he settled for what he could get.

You can see this in the way the story fails. But of course you can see it in the story as well. His approach it to tell the same story several different ways in parallel. Its not a technique that I admire. I think it simplifies and bludgeons. I think it insults the audience. But things like this seen to sell to a TeeVee audience who seeks a simple message conveyed simply. 

The main story is about a boy, clearly the writer as a young man. He has an experience identical to his later writing self: he has a dream of perfection, of achievement, of mastery. In this story, it is a matter of mastering knowledge and publicly being recognized for such. But he cannot, so he settles for second best, plugging away as a pedestrian.

In parallel, we have a love story, of him chasing a hot blond, failing, and settling for a substitute. We have the story of his mom, who cannot have her perfect husband (because he has died) so she settles for what companionship she can get, an ice cream salesman from down the road. We have a story about his best friend who has trouble settling for a second best life because he never even had a shot at anything else. We have a complementary story about a girl in the story who cannot accept things they way they are politically and strives toward an impossible better. (She's a serial protester and overtly described as unrealistically hopeful.) We even, by way of university classes, are given classical references to this very dynamic.

Its obvious that the writer wanted to make the arc simple. Its obvious that he wanted to conflate a coming of age story with an encounter and understanding of the limits of reality. Its obvious that he knew he couldn't succeed well and tried to explain why in the story. And its obvious that his current love is Jewish (with certain self-described qualifications that probably only a British Jew could understand). Its the quality the endearing Rebecca hall character has.

The two older women in this are both good actresses, both redheads. There's the Mom, who we see in the bathtub with her new lover. And there's the Mom of the hot girl, a 56 year old Lindsay Duncan who we see nude at the fridge. Both are wasted of course, since the thing has no shape at all. But if you know them, you'll appreciate that at least the casting director was on the ball.