---
movie title: Daddy
comment title: Paterast
rating: 1

movie imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0071383/
comment imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0071383/reviews-2
movie tmdb link: 
movie tmdb trailer: 
movie tmdb poster: 

layout: comment
---

Regular readers know that I'm pretty tolerant. Something has to be pretty extreme for me to declare it not worth exploring.

Films near the boundary may be simply bad (in terms of ineffectively made) but have some charm. Or they may be well enough made but require entry into a world that in the end doesn't seem to have been worth it. This is extreme in both measures.

here's what you will encounter;

There exists a very bad artist by the name of Niki De Saint Phalle. She makes crude pieces.

She is the writer of this film, and also the chief character, playing herself. It is an apparently therapeutic project to punish her father for sexually abusing her. Her father appears. The first half shows us the abuse, with her narrating by directly speaking to him in the film. The second half is him in wheelchair being tortured by her acting things out.

In that second half, she acquires a schoolgirl to taunt him with, someone that she herself fondles to arouse him.

Believe me, that even with this, it sounds more interesting than it is. It is incredibly poorly made. Unfortunately, she has this desire to always either be looking at us and speaking into the camera, or showing us some of her artwork, often childish drawings with some perversion apparent.

It isn't often that I warn people away from a movie. Usually I can find some redeeming value.

Not here.