---
movie title: WALL·E
comment title: The Certainty of Seeing
rating: 3

movie imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0910970/
comment imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0910970/reviews-256
movie tmdb link: http://www.themoviedb.org/movie/10681
movie tmdb trailer: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8-_9n5DtKOc
movie tmdb poster: http://cf2.imgobject.com/t/p/original/4qOKgcDcB0SojUIg2syzor1FeL7.jpg

layout: comment
---

You can read elsewhere the ordinary stuff -- about how wonderful this is; about how it exploits cinematic characterization, and even how conservative bloggers have decided to criticize it supposedly leftist premise. (Jees)

I did enjoy it. Its an amazing experience. But while watching it, I also was admiring the minds behind it. 

There are sometimes intelligent movies being made, and a surprising number of them are from Hollywood. I believe though that in most cases, it is because there is a critical mass of intelligent writers, filmmakers and decisionmakers that are working at the fringe of the establishment. Not so with Pixar. I've been constantly surprised at each project how they encapsulate essays in the advance of the cinematic vocabulary.

Its a bit like French new wave films made by film theorists, the films being more about what can be done than doing it in the service of effect that matters. (Their retort would be that it DOES matter if it changes the vehicle.)

But this Pixar business is a different model. Folks can come and be entertained without having to dip into vats of self-reference. Oh, there's plenty of superficial self-reference, but its all in the service of jokes, and they are all in the service of the narrative.

But other folks -- like me and perhaps you -- can also see that they are doing a few things that no one else is in quite the same advanced way, and they mark them so that you can read it as a sort of metanarrative. Jobs does the same thing with Apple. They make products that people use and like. But they also are in the business of defining what it is to be cool. They manufacture cool like they manufacture electronic products. You get both, and even in the products there's a reference to leadership, because being cool is all in who defines cool.

So when I saw this, I saw self-conscious art, and stories about the future of cinema. We've always gotten that with Pixar. Usually, it has to do with space, and what you can do with this new medium that is impossible with "real" cameras and places.

This last movie, "Ratatouie" added in the notion of control. Pulling the strings. I'm sure many have noticed that the shorts that Pixar creates to play before these features are a sort of synopsis of the reflective ideas they will use in the film. Last time the short and film were about control at a distance, with both the puppetmaster and puppet being featured, but the star was the puppetmaster. You can almost see how the whole story could have been generated by this idea: chef, French (who claim to have invented folded cinema of the reflexive kind), and rat. Secret recipes. Love always.

This time around, the cinematic sensibilities are profoundly deeper. A deep certainty. You have to know about 2001 as a start. Kubric's interest there was the warring narrator. Whose world is telling the story, man, machine or god. There is a story, but it hardly matters. Its all about who is telling the story, whose chair you sit in as the viewer. Its a masterful work.

Here, its bent only a little: mankind, machine and nature, but its folded back on the story -- which here has effect. Wall-e is natural, machine in form, but more human than the humans we see. But watch how they fold it again. Its a movie about the truth in movies, how the power of cinema can reach into the real world. A handholding there and here is a handhold between the worlds. 

And also watch how they built movies in. This isn't accidental. When they put a movie within a movie like this, the intent is to have the watcher of the outer movie join the world of the watcher of the inner movie. Its a reliable trick to get us to invest in what we see. But they go further. When we see the humans -- who are supposed to be like us but clearly aren't -- we note that THEY are hypnotized by the movies in front of them and cannot see the larger world beyond, and we can.

It happens to also spill over into the great narrative about how some of us can see that the planet is being destroyed and other blithely putter on. That business about saving image- laden artifacts as a memory storehouse... All these layers -- yes they are engineered by what is now the most intelligent and adventuresome narrative engineering lab in a studio.

All this extra introspection is used not as dry thesis, but in the service of the love story. It made it deeper, and more true. Knowing makes love true. So yes, it is effective, and fun, and deep.To compensate, the camera and space manipulation is less radical than usual.