---
movie title: Jane Eyre
comment title: Open Face, Empty Chapel
rating: 2

movie imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0119404/
comment imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0119404/reviews-42
movie tmdb link: http://www.themoviedb.org/movie/47333
movie tmdb trailer: 
movie tmdb poster: http://cf2.imgobject.com/t/p/original/7X8MMMspUwbZqTGIn7N9cnAxDub.jpg

layout: comment
---

I love watching films that exist in many incarnations, because often you can get more out of every version. There's a sort of circumlocution of the narrative that you can achieve with multiple versions. That's true even if the film itself is horrible. 

This one is. Its bad because the book depends on accretive structure. Its all about symmetries. Jane's character and all her desires are shaped by what we see early on, so we can understand the love we encounter toward the end. If you toss out all that structure, essentially you make Jane inhuman. You might get the message somehow that the love is intense, but you will not experience it, internalize it.

Its also wrong because of all the shouting. Everyone shouts, including the housekeeper! This is not the character of the times, nor the language, which is distinctly modern. I wonder what they were thinking, that there was a tradeoff of charm for understanding or familiarity?

It seems that most commentors focus on the nature of Rochester, how he played, whether as a broken man who is a pushy bully, or whether as a haunted, quiet basket case. If you're on Bronte's side, you'll prefer the more complex basket case. What works is that their breaks compliment and heal.

My own focus (and that of the author, for what it is worth) is on Jane. Watching many depictions of Jane is something of a thrill. Often the actress who is cast has as her chief attribute something that the filmmaker considers as an open innocence.

Jane came from a small world of books only. She created herself in spite of what she saw, excepting the essential Miss Temple. (Miss Temple's abandonment of Jane for marriage is key to the story.) Rochester has all of the opposite: extremely worldly but with no sense of self, no tools to invent himself. Jane is all story and Rochester is all lack of story, his story.

Anyway, this Jane is Samantha Morton. She does have an amazing demeanor. Her face really does project much of what we imagine Jane is. Firm, settled, strong, simple, and toward the end absolutely committed. We know from that face the whole story: the immense availability of character, the deep, deep heart (oh why cut the Helen Burns part?), the uncomplicated life template.

Other actresses have done well with this too. But there's something about seeing a body so gaunt and sexless, but so yearning.

It helps to know that Woody Allen cast her in a similar role, written for her in what I think is his most perfect movie. Following that Spielberg cast her in the pivotal role in his P K Dick/ Agatha Christie mystery. And following that, the experimental Winterbottom cast her in again a role that had Jane at the core. And all of that adds her Mary Queen of Scots in which you can still see our Jane.

It also helps to know that if you've followed this Jane, you've seen her nude several times and you've watched her body fill out to normal human size. So you'll know the physical repression she had at the time, 19 years old.