---
movie title: Pixote
comment title: Neo Neorealism
rating: 2

movie imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0082912/
comment imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0082912/reviews-33
movie tmdb link: http://www.themoviedb.org/movie/42148
movie tmdb trailer: 
movie tmdb poster: http://cf2.imgobject.com/t/p/original/6fptCynuJBOwvbjqhXdMUWXBlNq.jpg

layout: comment
---

Is it enough that a film seem "real?"

That's the pitch here, and in so many films. This one even starts with the filmmaker speaking to us before the film proper, telling us about the horrible situation and literally showing us the lead child actor in his "regular" life of squalor. We know also from the publicity that the other children are "real," though presumably all of the adults are actors. 

This film is set up to impress on this score. The situations are brutal and fully believable. The kids are effective. The scenes seem genuine.

But its just bad film, bad drama, bad storytelling except for two bits -- unless you count the value of realism. That's because it has no narrative structure. Yes, we see the child harden, and why, but is that enough? Not for me. It takes more than the real to make a story, I think.

I will recommend two scenes to you. They both feature Marília Pêra, who we saw as effective in "Central Station." She plays a prostitute who enlists the children to mug her johns. One scene has her after a successful heist in the woods with the children, seducing the oldest, who we know is in a relationship with one of the boys. This scene works amazingly well, lighted by the headlights of the stolen car, animated by her dancing body. The words tell us that she was a sexy go-go dancer who was fired, but the motions tell us that and so much more. 

Later, when they get back to her place and we see the two making love with the other children watching on the bed, she captures another mark. Wheels turn and tragedy strikes, setting up the penultimate scene which may be one of the most memorable in cinema.

People are dead, and the whore and child are left on the bed. Her legs are askew displaying her crotch to us and the child. They are reaching to each other, he simply staring and she filling the room with loneliness. The camera focus changes from his blank face to her vagina, which we have seen her use seductively before -- in fact in every case. She approaches the boy.

He in turn is drawn to her breast which he cuddles to and suckles which she accepts. But over a few moments you can see her confusion breaking her. A life of sexual twisting is visited on that contact and she breaks. The camera decides to show the boy, now lost in the last scene that follows. But it is the woman whose loss we know.

These two scenes demonstrate how much greater reality a talented actress can give us, more surely than the real thing.

See it for those two scenes.