---
movie title: Bubble
comment title: The Maker's Fingerprints
rating: 2

movie imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0454792/
comment imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0454792/reviews-111
movie tmdb link: http://www.themoviedb.org/movie/14788
movie tmdb trailer: 
movie tmdb poster: http://cf2.imgobject.com/t/p/original/3uUGgMvz7TRUZxz4MJh6DeVMl4q.jpg

layout: comment
---

Soderbergh is a fine man. I can live without him. Nothing he is likely to do will change my life. But he thinks about film and spends time on noteworthy projects.

This is one such.

It is not important nor particularly effective. It is interesting in the conceptual art sense when you think about what matters in the medium when watching it.

In terms of the production process, it is somewhat interesting, and most consider that it "statement." Shot on a prosumer camera operated by the director, edited on a stock Mac and delivered to simultaneous distribution as a digital file. It uses found actors and sets, shot in sequence so the ending was a surprise to them. Much has been made of how this was made.

More interesting to me is how that affects the narrative. For most folks, the "point" will be the aimless trivial lives shown here a sort of trailer park rubbernecking.

The story itself fights its own medium. Nothing happens in the lives of these people, even when a murder occurs. 

Here's what I think Soderbergh has in mind: its the opposite of what is generally written about this movie. The prevailing notion is that this is a sort of "Straight Story," where a presumably dense filmmaker relaxes, and we have a sort of Zen openness. But its not. This is the guy who remade "Solaris," a long quite journey that leads to about 90 seconds of puzzle at the end.

Its a mystery. A woman is killed. We have only a few suspects: her date for that evening from whom she stole unknown things; her estranged husband who violently encountered her about similar thefts; a competitor for the date's affections; the date's mother who seems strangely in the background. There is an even more absent homeowner whose house the victim his violated.

One of these is proved the killer by fingerprints on the strangled neck. (Does such a thing happen?) But this same suspect honestly denies guilt.

Meanwhile, we have been introduced to the doll factory. We know it more intimately than the characters, actually. We see the making of molded plastic faces and hands. We see sophisticated painting and related apparatus. All the main suspects work at this factory. Could one of them have faked the fingerprints? Soderbergh presents us with a solution, but is he fooling us too? After all, the supposed impression is that this is a real as you can get. But it is still a script, still a manufactured narrative. Still fakery imposed on life.