---
movie title: Brigitta
comment title: All Women, All Death
rating: 1

movie imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0211996/
comment imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0211996/reviews-1
movie tmdb link: 
movie tmdb trailer: 
movie tmdb poster: 

layout: comment
---

This is one of a lost genre, aggressive softcore with a plot, a genre made obsolete by "Deep Throat."

Its a cheap production, filmed in black and white with voice over and supposedly sexy heavy saxophone. The idea is that you can pretend you are watching a story which getting plenty of female nudity and the vicarious pleasure of sexual abandon.

The thing that is somewhat interesting is the story. These stories are functionally incidental to why the ticket is bought. But its almost an ethnographer's treasure hunt to discover these stories.

Brigitta is a single woman, sexually repressed, employed but lonely. She drinks.

She meets a man who charms her. This fellow has a hypnotic effect on her, sweeping her first in passionate sex with him. Then, in a natural segue that is astonishing, he has her whoring to pay off his debts while he moves on to another girl for his personal pleasure.

Brigitta enlists a friend, and the two are companionable prostitutes, living a depraved life. Drugs are implied but not shown. The friend gets VD, which Brigitta uses to infect her pimp as revenge. She laughs, ha ha ha. He is punished (though we are also told that the friend's case is easily taken care of). In the final seconds, Brigitta's life ends in some death unknown.

Along the way, we have lingering views of her body and her friend's; of some women that the pimp prefers; and of a lesbian sex film that Brigitta and her friend watch.

Not only is it strange and oddly seductive that the girl goes so seamlessly from girlfriend to whore. But there is this odd folding of the viewer into the pimp. He is exclusively an unsavory guy, whose "watching" destroys Brigitta's life (and presumably many others). We watch him watch, both us and he having precisely the same motives.

Later, as if that wasn't enough, once Brigitta's story comes to the fore, we watch her watching a film. Same thing, but through the eyes of the controlled. Very spooky. Very spooky.