---
movie title: Cashback
comment title: Finding Beauty
rating: 3

movie imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0460740/
comment imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0460740/reviews-87
movie tmdb link: http://www.themoviedb.org/movie/12225
movie tmdb trailer: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Sf2drFZbHH4
movie tmdb poster: http://cf2.imgobject.com/t/p/original/gLEtDXdpBsudVqdt0WoO5eVbX1a.jpg

layout: comment
---

Finally, a successful, cinematic guy date movie. Well, sorta.

Its a great cinematic experience. That's primarily what I liked and what I talked about.

To make this a success, they added two other, rather unrelated parts. One is the amusing secondary characters they insert to make us laugh and to divert attention. This is so common these days that we expect it in big studio productions. It's even written and sometimes directed by someone other than the original filmmaker. Here is it blatantly inserted. We allow it because it is amusing. We laugh. But it does actually distract from the really cool value this thing has to offer.

The second thing is the date movie form. I do not know if this was in the original short or not. It is dismayingly formulaic: guy falls for and wins girl; guy loses girl because of misunderstanding; guy wins girl back in public. Its more than just boring, its a concession to the ordinary that undermines the whole project. Shame on the filmmaker. The one concession is that unlike the amusing guys in the background, this is somewhat integrated into the special stuff.

That special stuff is the notion of art, a notion of an artist (much mentioned here) whose gift is to see beauty in ordinary things, reveal it to the woman (if she is the beauty) -- which is a wondrous thing indeed, and to convey it to others. 

It is, in fact true of both our main character and the filmmaker. In the film, the deal is that a young artist is so bereft from losing his girlfriend that he starts to see the work in cinematic terms -- and novel cinematic terms at that. He is able to "stop time" and examine the intrinsic beauty that happens to have appeared. Once this is a bag of spilled peas. Usually it is the women who visit the store to shop at night.

Now, there is a cheat here. All of the women. Every one of the women, even an older art gallery owner (who, in self-referential mode is the film's producer), are beautiful in a spectacularly obvious way, without special glasses. Yet, we loss over that because the narration (who is cinematically reified) makes clear that the eyes through which we see this are the eyes of an artist who:

-- desperately wants to see beauty to make his life worth living.

-- specifically thinks women's bodies are the ultimate expression of perfect beauty

-- has the ability to enter a scene outside the film, freezing it so as to examine it for its beauty and capture it in drawings.

Hence, we see him as a young boy, encountering the visual mysteries of special surfaces and places. We see him internally as discussing the nature of bodily encounter with his typical but goofy friend. And we see him exploring his environment as we men often do: undressing the women around us in search of those heavenly forms and expressive offering through being. We actually see him undressing them, which is the cinematic shock. It worked for me. It mattered. I would have climbed mountains to know this vision if I knew what it would be.

Bless this filmmaker for having such a perfect visions -- one that I would call voyeuristically folded, one that seems visually novel. Shame, shame on him for tarting it up with ordinary stuff to make it palatable to those who shouldn't matter in the world.

Celebration and shame. Love of women and discomfort for looking so deeply. Being intrinsically lonely and being reminded so.

Perfect. When it comes to couples, perfect.