---
movie title: Number 17
comment title: Etchings
rating: 3

movie imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0023285/
comment imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0023285/reviews-44
movie tmdb link: http://www.themoviedb.org/movie/15007
movie tmdb trailer: 
movie tmdb poster: http://cf2.imgobject.com/t/p/original/5ZcF7awTIzHwAwp4OizPDLOjGTd.jpg

layout: comment
---

Rembrandt impresses me of course. You can fall into something like "Night Watch" for months. It is to me what it is to many others, a masterpiece. It is the product of the application of a mastered symphony of techniques, all of which recede into the background as intended. When you encounter it, the fact that it is a painting evaporates and you simply inherit the man's vision and all that means. It can be life-altering.

But I had a recent opportunity to see a collection of his etchings, collected in that number for the first time. It was a vastly more profound experience. This is because he was experimenting with the various techniques, ideas, perspectives that he would use in his big works. Theye were more immediate for me because the matter of the etchings, the narrative if you will, receded and the medium came to the fore.

You could see the master encountering the medium itself and struggling with how to bend it to express what only he could see -- so that we could also see it. I was a public sketchbook of sorts, a dialog with with the public to see how they could harmonize vision. So instead of seeing a designed artifact -- an essay with they ways he wants to make his eyes available, you have his eyes raw, unedited. You have the real man, wrestling the world.

Hitchcock produced two masterpieces; I do not believe you can navigate the cinematic world -- which is to say the world we share with others -- without having them. I come back to them frequently. But this is a better experience. 

The story doesn't matter, rare for a Hitchcock movie. He usually sculpts things to support the narrative, but here we just have the things themselves. Oh, there is a story. It starts in a dark, spooky house with languid, punctuated discovery and then segues into a pretty frantic trainchase sequence. There are bodies that are not and multiple identities and motives that are not. But never mind all that.

In the midst of all these people trying to discover what the world is and how it works is our man Hitchcock. His camera is usually there to guide our curiosity and discovery, our anticipation and surprise. But here, the camera is his eye, experimenting. There are some radical things done here. This is his "Battleship Potempkin." 

One of the things to look for is how the edits in the train sequences are less anticipatory than in any of his other work, even prior work. He usually manages a cadence in the edits in the motion on the stage that he is able to annotate by the motion of the camera. It is all about this relationship -- always has been. See how here he tries all sorts of things in the first (haunted house) half -- too many to establish a baseline for the second half where motion is the constant.

Appreciate how many different techniques you see in the comings and goings on the train (and beside it), and how many of those here new ideas we can recognize later when he had Hollywood money and the discipline to focus.

Wonderful. A bad movie, be forewarned. But amazing experiments.