---
movie title: Step Up 3D
comment title: Bridges
rating: 3

movie imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1193631/
comment imdb link: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1193631/reviews-27
movie tmdb link: http://www.themoviedb.org/movie/41233
movie tmdb trailer: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=89TLbK6o-og
movie tmdb poster: http://cf2.imgobject.com/t/p/original/vHRAkN6EuQjAJK4DoR50hdYtdew.jpg

layout: comment
---

The big mystery with this is that so many people disliked it. It is a puzzle to me. In a minute, I'll say what I liked, but first, why?

I'm going to propose a spectrum of moviewatchers. At one end are those that report on the richness of the story, the believability of the characters, the solidity of the dramatic arc and so on. My comments here are generally in this camp, but focused on a different set of narrative principles. I'm going to suggest that these viewers lead reserved lives, and further that they believe they know and can recite their own narratives. In that recitation, they (we?) will use the dramatic devices we have seen. We don't welcome new ones for obvious reasons. A film is not so much a journey away from home but one that builds home.

At the other end of this imaginary spectrum are the people who live in their lives and for whom everything is an experience first and material for explanation second. I'm drawing this spectrum because I found this film important to me and important to the evolution of film. I dug it. I didn't care that the acting, characters and story were proremptory. They were designed to fade, to give us an excuse to tie together a series of visual experiences.

I loved the fact that none of these people were remotely attractive, that sex and sexual exploitation wasn't on the table. The heavy emphasis on family, as if loyalty were somehow central simply helped me to focus my energies coming to them as they did to me. 

Even the excessive product placements blew by me without annoying.

Because the experience was experience. I'm thinking that you have to be that second kind of person to like this. Or perhaps you have to have selves on both shores.

This is one of the few movies actually filmed in 3D. I saw this in RealD 3D, which is cheap threeD and I am starting to avoid it if there is an Imax 3D alternative, or the movie was converted from 2D. The circularly polarized light in some viewers produces strange cognitive dissonance. Also, fast horizontal movements have a stuttering, strobelike effect because the cognitive period is exactly half the 24 frames per second we accept as real motion. The motion blurs don't work right because the equipment used to capture and display are digital, and the postprocessing software to introduce threeD blur surprisingly isn't ready yet.

But this director understood this and used it. As the dances get more frantic, and the distracting effects more pronounced, he supplemented them with on-stage strobe effects and shifting contrasts. So a limit in the visual process becomes part of the dance. In fact, the cinematic orchestration far exceeds the apparent ambition as a vehicle to such dollars out of teen pockets. This camera dances the way the dancers do: it shifts and jumps ahead of what we expect. It is all about that, both the thing we see and the way we see it. Many of the more dramatic dance moves have been shifted in time, slowed by erratic tempos, confounding physics.

Space is used in clever ways. We have the choreography of course, which fills space in what is by now pretty conventional ways. We have the three dimensional effects. Many of these are blatant, gimmicky and to my mind work well to immerse us in this artificially energized world that is pretending to be natural and discovered energy. (These kids -- not the leads -- do have extraordinary life.) Space has narrative agency: the contest winnings are not a matter of proving the best dance crew, instead to save the loft in which the ersatz family resides. That place itself has some impossible, subtly off-putting physics in its structure. 

Literal bridges figure prominently in the urban fabric here, as well as the metaphorical ones, like the engineering-dance conflict that in some ways is reduced from the spectrum I mentioned above. Parkour in a couple scenes works with dancing as bridging as well. The good old Brooklyn Bridge is the setting for one of the most criticized scenes; they make calligraphic strokes of colored slurpee. This was a divide in the audience. I thought it intelligent and newly spatial: writing love dances in the air.

This would re-appear by reference in the way that smoke and water were used in the "contest" dances. The subject only seemed trivial, but cognitively this was serious business. The film vocabulary moves another strobed step forward across those bridges.

The fold? Our main character is a filmmaker, making a film about dance using the same characters as in our film! One scene -- not at all in the same tone as the rest of the movie -- has our second lead couple in an urban stageset re-imagining of the Astair-Rogers "I Won't Dance."

The heavily sanded, characterless face of the girl lead was distracting, especially contrasted to the rich beings of the dancers.

I think I saw Miss Prissy, the "queen of krump" from "Rize" in five seconds of interview at the beginning.